---
date: 2014-11-09T20:41:37-06:00
draft: false
title: Attributes
toc: true
author: "Noah Lange"
description: "Sizing up characters in brains and brawn."
---
In the actions undertaken by characters, success and failure are affected to some degree by their innate qualities. In the face of a moving vehicle, an agile character can dive out of the way, while a sluggish one might have no chance. Alternately, a particularly oblivious character may fail to notice the vehicle entirely, making his or her ability to dodge out of the way a moot point. These six scores that dictate a character’s general aptitude are called Attributes.

Three of these scores are physical attributes. Dexterity reflects a character’s ability to manipulate and interact with his or her hands. Agility is a character’s ability to move quickly and precisely. Constitution reflects a character’s physical make-up, their strength and stamina. The others are mental attributes. Intelligence is a character’s ability to process and evaluate new information. Perception is a character’s awareness of the outside world. Charisma reflects a character’s ability to act with éclat in situations requiring social skills.

These attributes are generated at character creation and remain more or less static throughout gameplay, save for occasionally incurred penalties or bonuses. For purposes of characterization, a score of 0 is entirely disabled, 1-2 impaired, 3-4 below average, 5-6 average, 7-8 above average, and 9-10 exceptional. Scores of ten or above are generally only obtainable by non-humans or by the use of implants or other mechanical augmentations.

# Attributes
There are six attributes in the Refuge Role-Playing Game: Dexterity, Agility, Constitution, Intelligence, Perception and Charisma. Each of the six attributes are associated with a particular character class, skill group and dictate a dependent score.

## Generating attribute scores
There are a variety of methods available for generating attribute scores, both randomly and deliberately.

For mundane campaigns, a random, normalized distribution of attribute scores can be generated by rolling three four-sided dice and subtracting two from the total (3d4-2). This leaves a normalized score somewhere between one and ten. This roll is repeated until six scores are available, at which point the player can assign them to a character’s attributes as he or she wishes.

A more spectacular campaign, or a set of more exceptional characters, could very well merit a more generous calculation for attribute scores: rolling 4d4, dropping the lowest and finally, subtracting two.

Alternately, a point-buy system with thirty-two (allowing characters with an average of 5.5 points for each attribute, roughly equivalent to a 3d4-2 roll) or thirty-six (6 points for each attribute) points can be used at the GM’s discretion to generate a less randomized set of attribute scores.

## Attribute modifiers
Depending on a character’s attribute scores, they receive bonuses and penalties to the use of relevant skills, and when attribute rolls are made, the use of the attributes themselves. The formula to calculate modifiers is simply Score - 5.

{{% example %}}
Example: Francis has an Agility score of 8; his modifier bonus for all Agility-based skill or attribute rolls is +3. He has a Constitution score of 3 and his modifier bonus for all Constitution-based skill or attribute rolls is -2.
{{% /example %}}

## Bonuses, penalties and leveling
While typically remaining stable throughout a character’s lifetime, attribute scores are subject to bonuses and penalties upon character creation, level-up and even during regular gameplay.

A character’s species often has an effect on a character’s attributes. Because some species are best oriented toward some attributes and away from others, a character’s species frequently imparts bonuses and penalties. These are applied on top of whatever attribute scores have been generated, and are permanent.

Every five levels, each character receives an additional attribute point, either to bolster a weak attribute or further increase a prominent score.

# Dexterity
Dexterity reflects a character’s skill at fine manipulation with his or her hands. Of all the classes, Dexterity is most important for the Soldier. A character’s Dexterity score is applied to:

* the universal skill Aim, as well as Security, Unarmed Combat (with Finesse: Unarmed Combat), Mêlée Weapons (with Finesse: Mêlée Weapons) and Engineering (with Tinkerer)
* the number of Abilities a character receives upon level-up

# Agility
Agility reflects a character’s ability to move, and the quality with which motions are performed. The attribute is most closely associated with the Scout. A character’s Agility modifiers:

* the universal skill Dodge, as well as Stealth
* the number of Action Points (AP) a character is able to expend during each round of combat

# Constitution
Constitution reflects a character’s physical strength, endurance and conditioning. The attribute is most closely associated with the Support class. A character’s Constitution is applied to:

* the universal skill Endurance, as well as Fortitude, Unarmed Combat, Mêlée Weapons and Intimidate
* the number of hit points (HP) a character receives at character-creation

# Intelligence
Intelligence reflects a character’s raw force of intellect, as well as his or her creativity and problem-solving skills. The attribute is most closely associated with the Techie class, and is applied to:

* the universal skill Willpower, as well as the skills Computer Use, Engineering, Heal and Intimidate (with the Creative Intimidation trait)
* the number of skill points a character receives upon level-up
* the number of additional skills a character can tag as class skills

# Perception
Perception reflects a character’s ability to receive and process external stimuli through the senses. The attribute is most closely associated with the Spacer class and modifies:

* the universal skill Awareness as well as Navigate
* the number of Traits a character receives upon level-up

# Charisma
Charisma reflects a character’s force of personality, as well as his or her social skills. The attribute is most closely associated with the Ambassador class and modifies:

* the universal skill Persuade, as well as Bluff and Intimidate (the latter with the Creative Intimidation trait)
* the number of Morale points a character receives upon character creation
